<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title></title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="volume-2" epub:type="volume">
			<section id="book-8" epub:type="division">
				<section id="chapter-2-8-3" epub:type="chapter">

					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h2>

					<p>
					She was good enough, as it proved, for him to put
					to her that evening, and with further ground for it,
					the next sharpest question that had been on his lips
					in the morning&mdash;which his other preoccupation had
					then, to his consciousness, crowded out. His opportunity
					was again made, as befell, by his learning from
					Mrs. Stringham, on arriving, as usual, with the close
					of day, at the palace, that Milly must fail them again
					at dinner, but would to all appearance be able to come
					down later. He had found Susan Shepherd alone in
					the great saloon, where even more candles than their
					friend's large common allowance&mdash;she grew daily
					more splendid; they were all struck with it and chaffed
					her about it&mdash;lighted up the pervasive mystery of
					Style. He had thus five minutes with the good lady
					before Mrs. Lowder and Kate appeared&mdash;minutes
					illumined indeed to a longer reach than by the number
					of Milly's candles.
					</p><p>
					"<i>May</i> she come down&mdash;ought she if she isn't
					really up to it?"
					</p><p>
					He had asked that in the wonderment always
					stirred in him by glimpses&mdash;rare as were these&mdash;of
					the inner truth about the girl. There was of course
					a question of health&mdash;it was in the air, it was in the
					ground he trod, in the food he tasted, in the sounds
					he heard, it was everywhere. But it was everywhere
					with the effect of a request to him&mdash;to his very delicacy,
					to the common discretion of others as well as
					his own&mdash;that no allusion to it should be made.
					There had practically been none, that morning,
					on her explained non-appearance&mdash;the absence of
					it, as we know, quite monstrous and awkward; and
					this passage with Mrs. Stringham offered him his first
					licence to open his eyes. He had gladly enough held
					them closed; all the more that his doing so performed
					for his own spirit a useful function. If he positively
					wanted not to be brought up with his nose against
					Milly's facts, what better proof could he have that his
					conduct was marked by straightness? It was perhaps
					pathetic for her, and for himself was perhaps
					even ridiculous; but he hadn't even the amount of
					curiosity that he would have had about an ordinary
					friend. He might have shaken himself at moments
					to try, for a sort of dry decency, to have it; but that
					too, it appeared, wouldn't come. In what therefore
					was the duplicity? He was at least sure about his
					feelings&mdash;it being so established that he had none
					at all. They were all for Kate, without a feather's
					weight to spare. He was acting for Kate&mdash;not, by
					the deviation of an inch, for her friend. He was accordingly
					not interested, for had he been interested
					he would have cared, and had he cared he would have
					wanted to know. Had he wanted to know he wouldn't
					have been purely passive, and it was his pure passivity
					that had to represent his dignity and his honour.
					His dignity and his honour, at the same time, let us
					add, fortunately fell short to-night of spoiling his little
					talk with Susan Shepherd. One glimpse&mdash;it was as
					if she had wished to give him that; and it was as if,
					for himself, on current terms, he could oblige her by
					accepting it. She not only permitted, she fairly invited
					him to open his eyes. "I'm so glad you're
					here." It was no answer to his question, but it had
					for the moment to serve. And the rest was fully to
					come.
					</p><p>
					He smiled at her and presently found himself, as
					a kind of consequence of communion with her, talking
					her own language. "It's a very wonderful experience."
					</p><p>
					"Well"&mdash;and her raised face shone up at him&mdash;"that's
					all I want you to feel about it. If I weren't
					afraid," she added, "there are things I should like
					to say to you."
					</p><p>
					"And what are you afraid of, please?" he encouragingly
					asked.
					</p><p>
					"Of other things that I may possibly spoil. Besides,
					I don't, you know, seem to have the chance.
					You're always, you know, <i>with</i> her."
					</p><p>
					He was strangely supported, it struck him, in his
					fixed smile; which was the more fixed as he felt in
					these last words an exact description of his course.
					It was an odd thing to have come to, but he was always
					with her. "Ah," he none the less smiled, "I'm
					not with her now."
					</p><p>
					"No&mdash;and I'm so glad, since I get this from it.
					She's ever so much better."
					</p><p>
					"Better? Then she <i>has</i> been worse?"
					</p><p>
					Mrs. Stringham waited. "She has been marvellous&mdash;that's
					what she has been. She <i>is</i> marvellous.
					But she's really better."
					</p><p>
					"Oh then if she's really better&mdash;!" But he
					checked himself, wanting only to be easy about it
					and above all not to appear engaged to the point of
					mystification. "We shall miss her the more at dinner."
					</p><p>
					Susan Shepherd, however, was all there for him.
					"She's keeping herself. You'll see. You'll not
					really need to miss anything. There's to be a little
					party."
					</p><p>
					"Ah I do see&mdash;by this aggravated grandeur."
					</p><p>
					"Well, it <i>is</i> lovely, isn't it? I want the whole thing.
					She's lodged for the first time as she ought, from her
					type, to be; and doing it&mdash;I mean bringing out all
					the glory of the place&mdash;makes her really happy.
					It's a Veronese picture, as near as can be&mdash;with me
					as the inevitable dwarf, the small blackamoor, put
					into a corner of the foreground for effect. If I only
					had a hawk or a hound or something of that sort I
					should do the scene more honour. The old housekeeper,
					the woman in charge here, has a big red
					cockatoo that I might borrow and perch on my thumb
					for the evening." These explanations and sundry
					others Mrs. Stringham gave, though not all with the
					result of making him feel that the picture closed him
					in. What part was there for <i>him</i>, with his attitude
					that lacked the highest style, in a composition in
					which everything else would have it? "They won't,
					however, be at dinner, the few people she expects&mdash;they
					come round afterwards from their respective
					hotels; and Sir Luke Strett and his niece, the principal
					ones, will have arrived from London but an hour or
					two ago. It's for <i>him</i> she has wanted to do something&mdash;to
					let it begin at once. We shall see more
					of him, because she likes him; and I'm so glad&mdash;she'll
					be glad too&mdash;that <i>you're</i> to see him." The
					good lady, in connexion with it, was urgent, was
					almost unnaturally bright. "So I greatly hope&mdash;!"
					But her hope fairly lost itself in the wide light of her
					cheer.
					</p><p>
					He considered a little this appearance, while she
					let him, he thought, into still more knowledge than
					she uttered. "What is it you hope?"
					</p><p>
					"Well, that you'll stay on."
					</p><p>
					"Do you mean after dinner?" She meant, he
					seemed to feel, so much that he could scarce tell where
					it ended or began.
					</p><p>
					"Oh that, of course. Why we're to have music&mdash;beautiful
					instruments and songs; and not Tasso
					declaimed as in the guide-books either. She has arranged
					it&mdash;or at least I have. That is Eugenio has.
					Besides, you're in the picture."
					</p><p>
					"Oh&mdash;I!" said Densher almost with the gravity
					of a real protest.
					</p><p>
					"You'll be the grand young man who surpasses
					the others and holds up his head and the wine-cup.
					What we hope," Mrs. Stringham pursued, "is that
					you'll be faithful to us&mdash;that you've not come for
					a mere foolish few days."
					</p><p>
					Densher's more private and particular shabby
					realities turned, without comfort, he was conscious,
					at this touch, in the artificial repose he had in his
					anxiety about them but half-managed to induce. The
					way smooth ladies, travelling for their pleasure and
					housed in Veronese pictures, talked to plain embarrassed
					working-men, engaged in an unprecedented
					sacrifice of time and of the opportunity for modest
					acquisition! The things they took for granted and the
					general misery of explaining! He couldn't tell them
					how he had tried to work, how it was partly what he
					had moved into rooms for, only to find himself, almost
					for the first time in his life, stricken and sterile; because
					that would give them a false view of the source
					of his restlessness, if not of the degree of it. It would
					operate, indirectly perhaps, but infallibly, to add to
					that weight as of expected performance which these
					very moments with Mrs. Stringham caused more and
					more to settle on his heart. He had incurred it, the
					expectation of performance; the thing was done, and
					there was no use talking; again, again the cold breath
					of it was in the air. So there he was. And at best he
					floundered. "I'm afraid you won't understand when
					I say I've very tiresome things to consider. Botherations,
					necessities at home. The pinch, the pressure in
					London."
					</p><p>
					But she understood in perfection; she rose to the
					pinch and the pressure and showed how they had been
					her own very element. "Oh the daily task and the
					daily wage, the golden guerdon or reward? No one
					knows better than I how they haunt one in the flight
					of the precious deceiving days. Aren't they just what
					I myself have given up? I've given up all to follow
					<i>her</i>. I wish you could feel as I do. And can't you,"
					she asked, "write about Venice?"
					</p><p>
					He very nearly wished, for the minute, that he could
					feel as she did; and he smiled for her kindly. "Do <i>you</i>
					write about Venice?"
					</p><p>
					"No; but I would&mdash;oh wouldn't I?&mdash;if I hadn't
					so completely given up. She's, you know, my princess,
					and to one's princess&mdash;"
					</p><p>
					"One makes the whole sacrifice?"
					</p><p>
					"Precisely. There you are!"
					</p><p>
					It pressed on him with this that never had a man
					been in so many places at once. "I quite understand
					that she's yours. Only you see she's not mine." He
					felt he could somehow, for honesty, risk that, as he
					had the moral certainty she wouldn't repeat it and
					least of all to Mrs. Lowder, who would find in it a disturbing
					implication. This was part of what he liked
					in the good lady, that she didn't repeat, and also that
					she gave him a delicate sense of her shyly wishing him
					to know it. That was in itself a hint of possibilities
					between them, of a relation, beneficent and elastic for
					him, which wouldn't engage him further than he
					could see. Yet even as he afresh made this out he felt
					how strange it all was. She wanted, Susan Shepherd
					then, as appeared, the same thing Kate wanted, only
					wanted it, as still further appeared, in so different a
					way and from a motive so different, even though
					scarce less deep. Then Mrs. Lowder wanted, by so
					odd an evolution of her exuberance, exactly what
					each of the others did; and he was between them all,
					he was in the midst. Such perceptions made occasions&mdash;well,
					occasions for fairly wondering if it
					mightn't be best just to consent, luxuriously, to <i>be</i>
					the ass the whole thing involved. Trying not to be and
					yet keeping in it was of the two things the more asinine.
					He was glad there was no male witness; it was a
					circle of petticoats; he shouldn't have liked a man to
					see him. He only had for a moment a sharp thought
					of Sir Luke Strett, the great master of the knife whom
					Kate in London had spoken of Milly as in commerce
					with, and whose renewed intervention at such a distance,
					just announced to him, required some accounting
					for. He had a vision of great London surgeons&mdash;if
					this one was a surgeon&mdash;as incisive all round; so
					that he should perhaps after all not wholly escape the
					ironic attention of his own sex. The most he might be
					able to do was not to care; while he was trying not to
					he could take that in. It was a train, however, that
					brought up the vision of Lord Mark as well. Lord
					Mark had caught him twice in the fact&mdash;the fact of
					his absurd posture; and that made a second male.
					But it was comparatively easy not to mind Lord Mark.
					</p><p>
					His companion had before this taken him up, and
					in a tone to confirm her discretion, on the matter of
					Milly's not being his princess. "Of course she's not.
					You must do something first."
					</p><p>
					Densher gave it his thought. "Wouldn't it be
					rather <i>she</i> who must?"
					</p><p>
					It had more than he intended the effect of bringing
					her to a stand. "I see. No doubt, if one takes it so."
					Her cheer was for the time in eclipse, and she looked
					over the place, avoiding his eyes, as in the wonder of
					what Milly could do. "And yet she has wanted to be
					kind."
					</p><p>
					It made him on the spot feel a brute. "Of course
					she has. No one could be more charming. She has
					treated me as if <i>I</i> were somebody. Call her my hostess
					as I've never had nor imagined a hostess, and I'm
					with you altogether. Of course," he added in the right
					spirit for her, "I do see that it's quite court life."
					</p><p>
					She promptly showed how this was almost all she
					wanted of him. "That's all I mean, if you understand
					it of such a court as never was: one of the courts
					of heaven, the court of a reigning seraph, a sort of a
					vice-queen of an angel. That will do perfectly."
					</p><p>
					"Oh well then I grant it. Only court life as a
					general thing, you know," he observed, "isn't supposed
					to pay."
					</p><p>
					"Yes, one has read; but this is beyond any book.
					That's just the beauty here; it's why she's the great
					and only princess. With her, at her court," said Mrs.
					Stringham, "it does pay." Then as if she had quite
					settled it for him: "You'll see for yourself."
					</p><p>
					He waited a moment, but said nothing to discourage
					her. "I think you were right just now. One must
					do something first."
					</p><p>
					"Well, you've done something."
					</p><p>
					"No&mdash;I don't see that. I can do more."
					</p><p>
					Oh well, she seemed to say, if he would have it so!
					"You can do everything, you know."
					</p><p>
					"Everything" was rather too much for him to
					take up gravely, and he modestly let it alone, speaking
					the next moment, to avert fatuity, of a different
					but a related matter. "Why has she sent for Sir
					Luke Strett if, as you tell me, she's so much better?"
					</p><p>
					"She hasn't sent. He has come of himself," Mrs.
					Stringham explained. "He has wanted to come."
					</p><p>
					"Isn't that rather worse then&mdash;if it means he
					mayn't be easy?"
					</p><p>
					"He was coming, from the first, for his holiday.
					She has known that these several weeks." After
					which Mrs. Stringham added: "You can <i>make</i> him
					easy."
					</p><p>
					"<i>I</i> can?" he candidly wondered. It was truly the
					circle of petticoats. "What have I to do with it for a
					man like that?"
					</p><p>
					"How do you know," said his friend, "what he's
					like? He's not like any one you've ever seen. He's a
					great beneficent being."
					</p><p>
					"Ah then he can do without me. I've no call, as an
					outsider, to meddle."
					</p><p>
					"Tell him, all the same," Mrs. Stringham urged,
					"what you think."
					</p><p>
					"What I think of Miss Theale?" Densher stared.
					It was, as they said, a large order. But he found the
					right note. "It's none of his business."
					</p><p>
					It did seem a moment for Mrs. Stringham too the
					right note. She fixed him at least with an expression
					still bright, but searching, that showed almost to excess
					what she saw in it; though what this might be he
					was not to make out till afterwards. "Say <i>that</i> to him
					then. Anything will do for him as a means of getting
					at you."
					</p><p>
					"And why should he get at me?"
					</p><p>
					"Give him a chance to. Let him talk to you. Then
					you'll see."
					</p><p>
					All of which, on Mrs. Stringham's part, sharpened
					his sense of immersion in an element rather more
					strangely than agreeably warm&mdash;a sense that was
					moreover, during the next two or three hours, to be
					fed to satiety by several other impressions. Milly
					came down after dinner, half a dozen friends&mdash;objects
					of interest mainly, it appeared, to the ladies of
					Lancaster Gate&mdash;having by that time arrived; and
					with this call on her attention, the further call of her
					musicians ushered by Eugenio, but personally and
					separately welcomed, and the supreme opportunity
					offered in the arrival of the great doctor, who came
					last of all, he felt her diffuse in wide warm waves the
					spell of a general, a beatific mildness. There was a
					deeper depth of it, doubtless, for some than for others;
					what he in particular knew of it was that he seemed
					to stand in it up to his neck. He moved about in it
					and it made no plash; he floated, he noiselessly swam
					in it, and they were all together, for that matter, like
					fishes in a crystal pool. The effect of the place, the
					beauty of the scene, had probably much to do with it;
					the golden grace of the high rooms, chambers of art in
					themselves, took care, as an influence, of the general
					manner, and made people bland without making
					them solemn. They were only people, as Mrs. Stringham
					had said, staying for the week or two at the inns,
					people who during the day had fingered their Baedekers,
					gaped at their frescoes and differed, over fractions
					of francs, with their gondoliers. But Milly, let
					loose among them in a wonderful white dress, brought
					them somehow into relation with something that made
					them more finely genial; so that if the Veronese picture
					of which he had talked with Mrs. Stringham was
					not quite constituted, the comparative prose of the
					previous hours, the traces of insensibility qualified by
					"beating down," were at last almost nobly disowned.
					There was perhaps something for him in the accident
					of his seeing her for the first time in white, but she
					hadn't yet had occasion&mdash;circulating with a clearness
					intensified&mdash;to strike him as so happily pervasive.
					She was different, younger, fairer, with the
					colour of her braided hair more than ever a not altogether
					lucky challenge to attention; yet he was loth
					wholly to explain it by her having quitted this once,
					for some obscure yet doubtless charming reason, her
					almost monastic, her hitherto inveterate black. Much
					as the change did for the value of her presence, she
					had never yet, when all was said, made it for <i>him</i>;
					and he was not to fail of the further amusement of
					judging her determined in the matter by Sir Luke
					Strett's visit. If he could in this connexion have felt
					jealous of Sir Luke Strett, whose strong face and type,
					less assimilated by the scene perhaps than any others,
					he was anon to study from the other side of the saloon,
					that would doubtless have been most amusing
					of all. But he couldn't be invidious, even to profit by
					so high a tide; he felt himself too much "in" it, as he
					might have said: a moment's reflexion put him more
					in than any one. The way Milly neglected him for
					other cares while Kate and Mrs. Lowder, without so
					much as the attenuation of a joke, introduced him to
					English ladies&mdash;that was itself a proof; for nothing
					really of so close a communion had up to this time
					passed between them as the single bright look and the
					three gay words (all ostensibly of the last lightness)
					with which her confessed consciousness brushed by
					him.
					</p><p>
					She was acquitting herself to-night as hostess, he
					could see, under some supreme idea, an inspiration
					which was half her nerves and half an inevitable harmony;
					but what he especially recognised was the
					character that had already several times broken out
					in her and that she so oddly appeared able, by choice
					or by instinctive affinity, to keep down or to display.
					She was the American girl as he had originally found
					her&mdash;found her at certain moments, it was true, in
					New York, more than at certain others; she was the
					American girl as, still more than then, he had seen
					her on the day of her meeting him in London and in
					Kate's company. It affected him as a large though
					queer social resource in her&mdash;such as a man, for instance,
					to his diminution, would never in the world
					be able to command; and he wouldn't have known
					whether to see it in an extension or a contraction of
					"personality," taking it as he did most directly for a
					confounding extension of surface. Clearly too it was
					the right thing this evening all round: that came out
					for him in a word from Kate as she approached him to
					wreak on him a second introduction. He had under
					cover of the music melted away from the lady toward
					whom she had first pushed him; and there was something
					in her to affect him as telling evasively a tale of
					their talk in the Piazza. To what did she want to
					coerce him as a form of penalty for what he had done
					to her there? It was thus in contact uppermost for
					him that he had done something; not only caused her
					perfect intelligence to act in his interest, but left her
					unable to get away, by any mere private effort, from
					his inattackable logic. With him thus in presence,
					and near him&mdash;and it had been as unmistakeable
					through dinner&mdash;there was no getting away for her
					at all, there was less of it than ever: so she could only
					either deal with the question straight, either frankly
					yield or ineffectually struggle or insincerely argue, or
					else merely express herself by following up the advantage
					she did possess. It was part of that advantage
					for the hour&mdash;a brief fallacious makeweight to his
					pressure&mdash;that there were plenty of things left in
					which he must feel her will. They only told him,
					these indications, how much she was, in such close
					quarters, feeling his; and it was enough for him again
					that her very aspect, as great a variation in its way as
					Milly's own, gave him back the sense of his action.
					It had never yet in life been granted him to know,
					almost materially to taste, as he could do in these
					minutes, the state of what was vulgarly called conquest.
					He had lived long enough to have been on occasion
					"liked," but it had never begun to be allowed
					him to be liked to any such tune in any such quarter.
					It was a liking greater than Milly's&mdash;or it would be:
					he felt it in him to answer for that. So at all events he
					read the case while he noted that Kate was somehow&mdash;for
					Kate&mdash;wanting in lustre. As a striking young
					presence she was practically superseded; of the mildness
					that Milly diffused she had assimilated all her
					share; she might fairly have been dressed to-night in
					the little black frock, superficially indistinguishable,
					that Milly had laid aside. This represented, he perceived,
					the opposite pole from such an effect as that of
					her wonderful entrance, under her aunt's eyes&mdash;he
					had never forgotten it&mdash;the day of their younger
					friend's failure at Lancaster Gate. She was, in her
					accepted effacement&mdash;it was actually her acceptance
					that made the beauty and repaired the damage&mdash;under
					her aunt's eyes now; but whose eyes were not
					effectually preoccupied? It struck him none the less
					certainly that almost the first thing she said to him
					showed an exquisite attempt to appear if not unconvinced
					at least self-possessed.
					</p><p>
					"Don't you think her good enough <i>now?</i>"
					Almost heedless of the danger of overt freedoms,
					she eyed Milly from where they stood, noted her in
					renewed talk, over her further wishes, with the members
					of her little orchestra, who had approached her
					with demonstrations of deference enlivened by native
					humours&mdash;things quite in the line of old Venetian
					comedy. The girl's idea of music had been
					happy&mdash;a real solvent of shyness, yet not drastic;
					thanks to the intermissions, discretions, a general
					habit of mercy to gathered barbarians, that reflected
					the good manners of its interpreters, representatives
					though these might be but of the order in which taste
					was natural and melody rank. It was easy at all events
					to answer Kate. "Ah my dear, you know how good
					I think her!"
					</p><p>
					"But she's <i>too</i> nice," Kate returned with appreciation.
					"Everything suits her so&mdash;especially her
					pearls. They go so with her old lace. I'll trouble
					you really to look at them." Densher, though aware
					he had seen them before, had perhaps not "really"
					looked at them, and had thus not done justice to the
					embodied poetry&mdash;his mind, for Milly's aspects,
					kept coming back to that&mdash;which owed them part
					of its style. Kate's face, as she considered them,
					struck him: the long, priceless chain, wound twice
					round the neck, hung, heavy and pure, down the front
					of the wearer's breast&mdash;so far down that Milly's
					trick, evidently unconscious, of holding and vaguely
					fingering and entwining a part of it, conduced presumably
					to convenience. "She's a dove," Kate went
					on, "and one somehow doesn't think of doves as bejewelled.
					Yet they suit her down to the ground."
					</p><p>
					"Yes&mdash;down to the ground is the word." Densher
					saw now how they suited her, but was perhaps
					still more aware of something intense in his companion's
					feeling about them. Milly was indeed a dove;
					this was the figure, though it most applied to her
					spirit. Yet he knew in a moment that Kate was just
					now, for reasons hidden from him, exceptionally
					under the impression of that element of wealth in her
					which was a power, which was a great power, and
					which was dove-like only so far as one remembered
					that doves have wings and wondrous flights, have
					them as well as tender tints and soft sounds. It even
					came to him dimly that such wings could in a given
					case&mdash;<i>had</i>, truly, in the case with which he was concerned&mdash;spread
					themselves for protection. Hadn't
					they, for that matter, lately taken an inordinate reach,
					and weren't Kate and Mrs. Lowder, weren't Susan
					Shepherd and he, wasn't he in particular, nestling
					under them to a great increase of immediate ease?
					All this was a brighter blur in the general light, out of
					which he heard Kate presently going on.
					</p><p>
					"Pearls have such a magic that they suit every
					one."
					</p><p>
					"They would uncommonly suit you," he frankly
					returned.
					</p><p>
					"Oh yes, I see myself!"
					</p><p>
					As she saw herself, suddenly, he saw her&mdash;she
					would have been splendid; and with it he felt more
					what she was thinking of. Milly's royal ornament
					had&mdash;under pressure now not wholly occult&mdash;taken
					on the character of a symbol of differences, differences
					of which the vision was actually in Kate's face.
					It might have been in her face too that, well as she
					certainly would look in pearls, pearls were exactly
					what Merton Densher would never be able to give
					her. Wasn't <i>that</i> the great difference that Milly to-night
					symbolised? She unconsciously represented to
					Kate, and Kate took it in at every pore, that there
					was nobody with whom she had less in common than
					a remarkably handsome girl married to a man unable
					to make her on any such lines as that the least little
					present. Of these absurdities, however, it was not
					till afterwards that Densher thought. He could think
					now, to any purpose, only of what Mrs. Stringham
					had said to him before dinner. He could but come
					back to his friend's question of a minute ago. "She's
					certainly good enough, as you call it, in the sense that
					I'm assured she's better. Mrs. Stringham, an hour
					or two since, was in great feather to me about it. She
					evidently believes her better."
					</p><p>
					"Well, if they choose to call it so&mdash;!"
					</p><p>
					"And what do <i>you</i> call it&mdash;as against them?"
					</p><p>
					"I don't call it anything to any one but you. I'm
					not 'against' them!" Kate added as with just a fresh
					breath of impatience for all he had to be taught.
					</p><p>
					"That's what I'm talking about," he said. "What
					do you call it to me?"
					</p><p>
					It made her wait a little. "She isn't better. She's
					worse. But that has nothing to do with it."
					</p><p>
					"Nothing to do?" He wondered.
					</p><p>
					But she was clear. "Nothing to do with us. Except
					of course that we're doing our best for her. We're
					making her want to live." And Kate again watched
					her. "To-night she does want to live." She spoke
					with a kindness that had the strange property of
					striking him as inconsequent&mdash;so much, and doubtless
					so unjustly, had all her clearness been an implication
					of the hard. "It's wonderful. It's beautiful."
					</p><p>
					"It's beautiful indeed."
					</p><p>
					He hated somehow the helplessness of his own
					note; but she had given it no heed. "She's doing
					it for <i>him</i>"&mdash;and she nodded in the direction of
					Milly's medical visitor. "She wants to be for him at
					her best. But she can't deceive him."
					</p><p>
					Densher had been looking too; which made him
					say in a moment: "And do you think <i>you</i> can? I
					mean, if he's to be with us here, about your sentiments.
					If Aunt Maud's so thick with him&mdash;!"
					</p><p>
					Aunt Maud now occupied in fact a place at his
					side and was visibly doing her best to entertain him,
					though this failed to prevent such a direction of his
					own eyes&mdash;determined, in the way such things happen,
					precisely by the attention of the others&mdash;as
					Densher became aware of and as Kate promptly
					marked. "He's looking at <i>you</i>. He wants to speak
					to you."
					</p><p>
					"So Mrs. Stringham," the young man laughed,
					"advised me he would."
					</p><p>
					"Then let him. Be right with him. I don't need,"
					Kate went on in answer to the previous question,
					"to deceive him. Aunt Maud, if it's necessary, will
					do that. I mean that, knowing nothing about me, he
					can see me only as she sees me. She sees me now so
					well. He has nothing to do with me."
					</p><p>
					"Except to reprobate you," Densher suggested.
					</p><p>
					"For not caring for <i>you?</i> Perfectly. As a brilliant
					young man driven by it into your relation with
					Milly&mdash;as all <i>that</i> I leave you to him."
					</p><p>
					"Well," said Densher sincerely enough, "I think
					I can thank you for leaving me to some one easier
					perhaps with me than yourself."
					</p><p>
					She had been looking about again meanwhile, the
					lady having changed her place, for the friend of Mrs.
					Lowder's to whom she had spoken of introducing
					him. "All the more reason why I should commit you
					then to Lady Wells."
					</p><p>
					"Oh but wait." It was not only that he distinguished
					Lady Wells from afar, that she inspired him
					with no eagerness, and that, somewhere at the back
					of his head, he was fairly aware of the question, in
					germ, of whether this was the kind of person he should
					be involved with when they were married. It was
					furthermore that the consciousness of something he
					had not got from Kate in the morning, and that
					logically much concerned him, had been made more
					keen by these very moments&mdash;to say nothing of
					the consciousness that, with their general smallness
					of opportunity, he must squeeze each stray instant
					hard. If Aunt Maud, over there with Sir Luke,
					noted him as a little "attentive," that might pass for
					a futile demonstration on the part of a gentleman who
					had to confess to having, not very gracefully, changed
					his mind. Besides, just now, he didn't care for Aunt
					Maud except in so far as he was immediately to
					show. "How can Mrs. Lowder think me disposed of
					with any finality, if I'm disposed of only to a girl
					who's dying? If you're right about that, about the
					state of the case, you're wrong about Mrs. Lowder's
					being squared. If Milly, as you say," he lucidly
					pursued, "can't deceive a great surgeon, or whatever,
					the great surgeon won't deceive other people&mdash;not
					those, that is, who are closely concerned. He won't
					at any rate deceive Mrs. Stringham, who's Milly's
					greatest friend; and it will be very odd if Mrs. Stringham
					deceives Aunt Maud, who's her own."
					</p><p>
					Kate showed him at this the cold glow of an idea
					that really was worth his having kept her for. "Why
					will it be odd? I marvel at your seeing your way so
					little."
					</p><p>
					Mere curiosity even, about his companion, had
					now for him its quick, its slightly quaking intensities.
					He had compared her once, we know, to a "new
					book," an uncut volume of the highest, the rarest
					quality; and his emotion (to justify that) was again
					and again like the thrill of turning the page. "Well,
					you know how deeply I marvel at the way <i>you</i> see
					it!"
					</p><p>
					"It doesn't in the least follow," Kate went on,
					"that anything in the nature of what you call deception
					on Mrs. Stringham's part will be what you call
					odd. Why shouldn't she hide the truth?"
					</p><p>
					"From Mrs. Lowder?" Densher stared. "Why
					should she?"
					</p><p>
					"To please you."
					</p><p>
					"And how in the world can it please me?"
					</p><p>
					Kate turned her head away as if really at last almost
					tired of his density. But she looked at him again
					as she spoke. "Well then to please Milly." And before
					he could question: "Don't you feel by this time
					that there's nothing Susan Shepherd won't do for
					you?"
					</p><p>
					He had verily after an instant to take it in, so sharply
					it corresponded with the good lady's recent reception
					of him. It was queerer than anything again, the way
					they all came together round him. But that was an
					old story, and Kate's multiplied lights led him on
					and on. It was with a reserve, however, that he confessed
					this. "She's ever so kind. Only her view of
					the right thing may not be the same as yours."
					</p><p>
					"How can it be anything different if it's the view
					of serving you?"
					</p><p>
					Densher for an instant, but only for an instant, hung
					fire. "Oh the difficulty is that I don't, upon my honour,
					even yet quite make out how yours does serve me."
					</p><p>
					"It helps you&mdash;put it then," said Kate very simply&mdash;"to
					serve <i>me</i>. It gains you time."
					</p><p>
					"Time for what?"
					</p><p>
					"For everything!" She spoke at first, once more,
					with impatience; then as usual she qualified. "For
					anything that may happen."
					</p><p>
					Densher had a smile, but he felt it himself as
					strained. "You're cryptic, love!"
					</p><p>
					It made her keep her eyes on him, and he could
					thus see that, by one of those incalculable motions in
					her without which she wouldn't have been a quarter
					so interesting, they half-filled with tears from some
					source he had too roughly touched. "I'm taking a
					trouble for you I never dreamed I should take for any
					human creature."
					</p><p>
					Oh it went home, making him flush for it; yet he
					soon enough felt his reply on his lips. "Well, isn't my
					whole insistence to you now that I can conjure trouble
					away?" And he let it, his insistence, come out again;
					it had so constantly had, all the week, but its step or
					two to make. "There <i>need</i> be none whatever between
					us. There need be nothing but our sense of each other."
					</p><p>
					It had only the effect at first that her eyes grew dry
					while she took up again one of the so numerous links
					in her close chain. "You can tell her anything you
					like, anything whatever."
					</p><p>
					"Mrs. Stringham? I <i>have</i> nothing to tell her."
					</p><p>
					"You can tell her about <i>us</i>. I mean," she wonderfully
					pursued, "that you do still like me."
					</p><p>
					It was indeed so wonderful that it amused him.
					"Only not that you still like me."
					</p><p>
					She let his amusement pass. "I'm absolutely certain
					she wouldn't repeat it."
					</p><p>
					"I see. To Aunt Maud."
					</p><p>
					"You don't quite see. Neither to Aunt Maud nor to
					any one else." Kate then, he saw, was always seeing
					Milly much more, after all, than he was; and she
					showed it again as she went on. "<i>There</i>, accordingly,
					is your time."
					</p><p>
					She did at last make him think, and it was fairly
					as if light broke, though not quite all at once. "You
					must let me say I <i>do</i> see. Time for something in
					particular that I understand you regard as possible.
					Time too that, I further understand, is time for you as
					well."
					</p><p>
					"Time indeed for me as well." And encouraged
					visibly by his glow of concentration, she looked at him
					as through the air she had painfully made clear. Yet
					she was still on her guard. "Don't think, however,
					I'll do all the work for you. If you want things named
					you must name them."
					</p><p>
					He had quite, within the minute, been turning
					names over; and there was only one, which at last
					stared at him there dreadful, that properly fitted.
					"Since she's to die I'm to marry her?"
					</p><p>
					It struck him even at the moment as fine in her that
					she met it with no wincing nor mincing. She might
					for the grace of silence, for favour to their conditions,
					have only answered him with her eyes. But her lips
					bravely moved. "To marry her."
					</p><p>
					"So that when her death has taken place I shall
					in the natural course have money?"
					</p><p>
					It was before him enough now, and he had nothing
					more to ask; he had only to turn, on the spot, considerably
					cold with the thought that all along&mdash;to
					his stupidity, his timidity&mdash;it had been, it had
					been only, what she meant. Now that he was in possession
					moreover she couldn't forbear, strangely
					enough, to pronounce the words she hadn't pronounced:
					they broke through her controlled and colourless
					voice as if she should be ashamed, to the
					very end, to have flinched. "You'll in the natural
					course have money. We shall in the natural course
					be free."
					</p><p>
					"Oh, oh, oh!" Densher softly murmured.
					</p><p>
					"Yes, yes, yes." But she broke off. "Come to
					Lady Wells."
					</p><p>
					He never budged&mdash;there was too much else. "I'm
					to propose it then&mdash;marriage&mdash;on the spot?"
					</p><p>
					There was no ironic sound he needed to give it; the
					more simply he spoke the more he seemed ironic.
					But she remained consummately proof. "Oh I can't
					go into that with you, and from the moment you don't
					wash your hands of me I don't think you ought to ask
					me. You must act as you like and as you can."
					</p><p>
					He thought again. "I'm far&mdash;as I sufficiently
					showed you this morning&mdash;from washing my hands
					of you."
					</p><p>
					"Then," said Kate, "it's all right."
					</p><p>
					"All right?" His eagerness flamed. "You'll
					come?"
					</p><p>
					But he had had to see in a moment that it wasn't
					what she meant. "You'll have a free hand, a clear
					field, a chance&mdash;well, quite ideal."
					</p><p>
					"Your descriptions"&mdash;her "ideal" was such a
					touch!&mdash;"are prodigious. And what I don't make
					out is how, caring for me, you can like it."
					</p><p>
					"I don't like it, but I'm a person, thank goodness,
					who can do what I don't like."
					</p><p>
					It wasn't till afterwards that, going back to it, he
					was to read into this speech a kind of heroic ring, a
					note of character that belittled his own incapacity for
					action. Yet he saw indeed even at the time the greatness
					of knowing so well what one wanted. At the time
					too, moreover, he next reflected that he after all knew
					what <i>he</i> did. But something else on his lips was uppermost.
					"What I don't make out then is how you can
					even bear it."
					</p><p>
					"Well, when you know me better you'll find out
					how much I can bear." And she went on before he
					could take up, as it were, her too many implications.
					That it was left to him to know her, spiritually, "better"
					after his long sacrifice to knowledge&mdash;this for
					instance was a truth he hadn't been ready to receive
					so full in the face. She had mystified him enough,
					heaven knew, but that was rather by his own generosity
					than by hers. And what, with it, did she seem
					to suggest she might incur at his hands? In spite of
					these questions she was carrying him on. "All you'll
					have to do will be to stay."
					</p><p>
					"And proceed to my business under your eyes?"
					</p><p>
					"Oh dear no&mdash;we shall go."
					</p><p>
					"'Go?'" he wondered. "Go when, go where?"
					</p><p>
					"In a day or two&mdash;straight home. Aunt Maud
					wishes it now."
					</p><p>
					It gave him all he could take in to think of. "Then
					what becomes of Miss Theale?"
					</p><p>
					"What I tell you. She stays on, and you stay with
					her."
					</p><p>
					He stared. "All alone?"
					</p><p>
					She had a smile that was apparently for his tone.
					"You're old enough&mdash;with plenty of Mrs. Stringham."
					</p><p>
					Nothing might have been so odd for him now,
					could he have measured it, as his being able to feel,
					quite while he drew from her these successive cues,
					that he was essentially "seeing what she would say"&mdash;an
					instinct compatible for him therefore with that
					absence of a need to know her better to which she had
					a moment before done injustice. If it hadn't been
					appearing to him in gleams that she would somewhere
					break down, he probably couldn't have gone on.
					Still, as she wasn't breaking down there was nothing
					for him but to continue. "Is your going Mrs. Lowder's
					idea?"
					</p><p>
					"Very much indeed. Of course again you see what
					it does for us. And I don't," she added, "refer only to
					our going, but to Aunt Maud's view of the general
					propriety of it."
					</p><p>
					"I see again, as you say," Densher said after a moment.
					"It makes everything fit."
					</p><p>
					"Everything."
					</p><p>
					The word, for a little, held the air, and he might
					have seemed the while to be looking, by no means
					dimly now, at all it stood for. But he had in fact
					been looking at something else. "You leave her here
					then to die?"
					</p><p>
					"Ah she believes she won't die. Not if you stay.
					I mean," Kate explained, "Aunt Maud believes."
					</p><p>
					"And that's all that's necessary?"
					</p><p>
					Still indeed she didn't break down. "Didn't we
					long ago agree that what she believes is the principal
					thing for us?"
					</p><p>
					He recalled it, under her eyes, but it came as from
					long ago. "Oh yes. I can't deny it." Then he added:
					"So that if I stay&mdash;"
					</p><p>
					"It won't"&mdash;she was prompt&mdash;"be our fault."
					</p><p>
					"If Mrs. Lowder still, you mean, suspects us?"
					</p><p>
					"If she still suspects us. But she won't."
					</p><p>
					Kate gave it an emphasis that might have appeared
					to leave him nothing more; and he might in fact well
					have found nothing if he hadn't presently found:
					"But what if she doesn't accept me?"
					</p><p>
					It produced in her a look of weariness that made
					the patience of her tone the next moment touch him.
					"You can but try."
					</p><p>
					"Naturally I can but try. Only, you see, one has to
					try a little hard to propose to a dying girl."
					</p><p>
					"She isn't for you as if she's dying." It had determined
					in Kate the flash of <i>justesse</i> he could perhaps
					most, on consideration, have admired, since her retort
					touched the truth. There before him was the fact
					of how Milly to-night impressed him, and his companion,
					with her eyes in his own and pursuing his impression
					to the depths of them, literally now perched
					on the fact in triumph. She turned her head to where
					their friend was again in range, and it made him turn
					his, so that they watched a minute in concert. Milly,
					from the other side, happened at the moment to
					notice them, and she sent across toward them in response
					all the candour of her smile, the lustre of her
					pearls, the value of her life, the essence of her wealth.
					It brought them together again with faces made
					fairly grave by the reality she put into their plan. Kate
					herself grew a little pale for it, and they had for a time
					only a silence. The music, however, gay and vociferous,
					had broken out afresh and protected more than
					interrupted them. When Densher at last spoke it was
					under cover.
					</p><p>
					"I might stay, you know, without trying."
					</p><p>
					"Oh to stay <i>is</i> to try."
					</p><p>
					"To have for herself, you mean, the appearance of
					it?"
					</p><p>
					"I don't see how you can have the appearance
					more."
					</p><p>
					Densher waited. "You think it then possible she
					may <i>offer</i> marriage?"
					</p><p>
					"I can't think&mdash;if you really want to know&mdash;what
					she may <i>not</i> offer!"
					</p><p>
					"In the manner of princesses, who do such
					things?"
					</p><p>
					"In any manner you like. So be prepared."
					</p><p>
					Well, he looked as if he almost were. "It will be
					for me then to accept. But that's the way it must
					come."
					</p><p>
					Kate's silence, so far, let it pass; but she presently
					said: "You'll, on your honour, stay then?"
					</p><p>
					His answer made her wait, but when it came it was
					distinct. "Without you, you mean?"
					</p><p>
					"Without us."
					</p><p>
					"And you yourselves go at latest&mdash;?"
					</p><p>
					"Not later than Thursday."
					</p><p>
					It made three days. "Well," he said, "I'll stay,
					on my honour, if you'll come to me. On your honour."
					</p><p>
					Again, as before, this made her momentarily rigid,
					with a rigour out of which, at a loss, she vaguely cast
					about her. Her rigour was more to him, nevertheless,
					than all her readiness; for her readiness was the woman
					herself, and this other thing a mask, a stop-gap
					and a "dodge." She cast about, however, as happened,
					and not for the instant in vain. Her eyes,
					turned over the room, caught at a pretext. "Lady
					Wells is tired of waiting: she's coming&mdash;see&mdash;to
					<i>us</i>."
					</p><p>
					Densher saw in fact, but there was a distance for
					their visitor to cross, and he still had time. "If you
					decline to understand me I wholly decline to understand
					you. I'll do nothing."
					</p><p>
					"Nothing?" It was as if she tried for the minute
					to plead.
					</p><p>
					"I'll do nothing. I'll go off before you. I'll go to-morrow."
					</p><p>
					He was to have afterwards the sense of her having
					then, as the phrase was&mdash;and for vulgar triumphs
					too&mdash;seen he meant it. She looked again at Lady
					Wells, who was nearer, but she quickly came back.
					"And if I do understand?"
					</p><p>
					"I'll do everything."
					</p><p>
					She found anew a pretext in her approaching
					friend: he was fairly playing with her pride. He had
					never, he then knew, tasted, in all his relation with
					her, of anything so sharp&mdash;too sharp for mere sweetness&mdash;as
					the vividness with which he saw himself
					master in the conflict. "Well, I understand."
					</p><p>
					"On your honour?"
					</p><p>
					"On my honour."
					</p><p>
					"You'll come?"
					</p><p>
					"I'll come."
					</p>
				</section>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
